I've I've rarely rarely sat down across
from somebody and had them be able to
articulate what do you actually want
they cannot answer that question and
they fill it with addictions they fill
it with Hobbies they fill it with uh
dopamine Chase they fill it with so much
stuff and nobody can answer that
question what do you want it's what do I
don't want and why am I feeling just
uncomfortable it's because of them it's
because of him it's because of her
nothing that you want will manifest
itself unless you aim for it and you
won't aim for it unless you know what it
is and you won't know what it is unless
you ask yourself and then you might say
well why don't you ask yourself and the
answer is well maybe no one ever
explained to you that you needed to and
then maybe you don't also trust yourself
you know because you might think well if
I let myself know what I wanted given my
bloody track record I would do
everything I could to screw it up so
I'll just keep myself opaque to myself
so that I don't fail at something that's
truly important I can always Regale with
myself with the idea that well I didn't
succeed but I didn't really try had I
really tried I might have succeeded
whereas if you let yourself know what
you want and then you try you also set
the preconditions for failure
[Music]
hello everyone
watching and listening on YouTube or one
of the associated podcasts I'm here
today with Dr John deloney
he's the author of own your past change
your future we're going to talk today
and I'm very happy to do this to talk to
another clinician about
the fact that you live your life through
a story that you see the world through a
story what that story might be like when
things are going wrong how it might be
approved and also to talk about identity
and its transformations in the most
practical possible way and so
um there are specifics that we can talk
about but that's a good place to start
what got you so interested in stories
John
um I I think it I reverse engineered my
way into it
um it was learning the trauma narrative
that played out in the human body 10 15
30 years later after the initial trauma
and so I've always thought stories were
narrative right there was something I
thought about I did not understand that
my body was keeping the score to quote
vanderkolk right that my body was
revving up in fighting battles that I
didn't even know was happening and so
we're looking at the long-term data man
and people are having strokes and cancer
and heart attacks from from childhood
experiences and that made me step back
and go whoa there's there's these
different layers to these stories
happening all over the place and it's
not just narrative it's it's the entire
ecosystem that I call my body right my
Human Experience and then as I began to
pull the thread on those man
um those stories were born into and the
stories we were told have such a
formative shaping of of
of our life experience and those stories
become the stories we tell ourselves
which as we all know in mental health
professionals that shapes everything who
I think I am and what I think I'm
capable or not capable of or I'm the
worst thing to ever happen to me those
stories are highly limiting or they are
the jet fuel on and on a well-lived life
right so if we can discuss those stories
man what a shape-shifting opportunity
for us yeah well that idea about stories
in some sense being stored in the body
is kind of interesting and so the way I
conceptualize it is that
a story manifests itself in a in a
personality in a set of goals and a set
of assumptions about the world
perceptions about the world and
if you have had terrible things happen
to you in the past and that's pretty
much true of ever of everyone although
some people more than others
then your body computes the present
danger of the environment based on how
many things have happened to you that
are terrible in the past that that
aren't resolved and resolved would mean
that you had generated a solution for
them and if you if your
psychophysiological system assumes that
all the danger that you were subject to
Once is still present in the environment
that it's going to set you on edge as if
you're walking in dangerous territory
and the psychophysiological consequence
of that is that you're prepared for
danger and that does such things as burn
up excess resources because you're much
more reactive and on point than you
might otherwise be in an anxiety prone
manner it also suppresses immunological
function because your body isn't that
worried about long-term immunological
Health if you're confronting an
emergency
and so that you you talk in your book
about changing your past owning your
past and it's useful to Define that
you're likely to overcome a trauma let's
say and no longer in some sense store it
psychophysiologically if you've
generated a causal story about the
reason that the trauma emerged and then
reconfigured the way that you're
conducting your life so that the
probability that a similar thing will
happen to you is reduced to close to
zero
right it's not catharsis right it's
understanding yeah
the challenge there is I think we've
following that thread all the way to our
modern psychological ethos we've created
a world that is based entirely on blame
and like somebody else is responsible
and so I've got to continue to cut and
cut and cut and I reduce myself to a two
by two square with which I can exist and
if you enter my Square then whether it's
ideologically or physically then
suddenly you're affronting me and I
think there's something about owning
your past I look at it more in terms of
can I think through what I remember to
happen have happened and by the way we
know that memory is a disastrous like
narrative Storyteller right so I care
less about what actually happened and
more I'm in my 40s I'm telling myself
this story that happened can I tell that
story can I relive that story and my
body doesn't take off on me right it
doesn't rush to solve the problem for me
because it knows I'm driving now right
the thing about memory is that it's not
there to provide an accurate objective
record of the past which is in fact
impossible because the past is so
unbelievably complex it's more like a
navigation tool which is I went here I
fell into something terrible and now I
need to
re-calibrate the navigation map that I'm
using so that I don't fall into the same
hole and you know one of the things that
people might want to know who are
listening is that if you have a memory
that's older than about 18 months and it
haunts you and when it comes up
involuntarily it produces a stress
reaction what that means is that as far
as your nervous system is concerned and
so as far as your body's concerned that
danger hasn't gone away and what's
happening is an unconscious alarm system
that's looking for pitfalls and holes is
warning you that the map that you're
using is incomplete in a manner that
might
might enable you to fall into the same
hole and so one of the things that
people can do that's very useful is if
you have memories like that that plague
you
is to bring them to mind voluntarily
instead of waiting for them to come
after you involuntarily and then to
Think Through what has changed and what
might not have but also to come up with
a plan so that if a similar circumstance
arose you'd be in a better position in
one way or another to deal with it
there's no other way of getting the
memory to go away like merely
re-contemplating it in the same manner
over and over won't do it and allowing
it to plague you unconsciously it'll do
that forever until you solve it it might
show up in your dreams it'll show up in
your fantasies it'll trigger you so to
speak when you're talking to other
people if they happen to discuss a topic
that's related to it and it's because
that the narrative is one of failure and
defeat the event was one of failure and
defeat and if there isn't a map to allow
you to transcend that that's functional
then the part of your brain that is
concerned with identifying danger is
never going to let you go
yeah and I I think culturally we've
created a pathology of discomfort and as
you just outlined so eloquently the only
way through this is to turn and face it
and walk directly through it right and
if you continue to run from the memories
and pathologize and Chase the behaviors
you end up with our
over diagnostic approach to everything
instead of turning and facing these
things and letting your body heal
through relationships and other things
in your life
um man we just end up chasing your tail
and you called it out the more you run
the more your body thinks it's winning
it's getting away from this stuff so it
actually reinforces the anxiety it
reinforces some of these
um like psychological ailments the
further you run from it the only healing
is through it and in the culture we've
created for ourselves says that
uncomfortable discomfort is bad and it's
to be avoided at all costs it and it's
it's the only path to Healing
big government continues to spend
borrowed money inflation continues to
swell dragging down our economy and the
stock market has entered bear territory
so what's your plan are your assets
Diversified I'm Phillip Patrick precious
metal specialist for the Birch gold
group for nearly 20 years we've helped
Americans diversify into gold and we can
help you too did you know you can own
physical gold and silver in a tax
sheltered account we can help you
transfer an IRA or 401K tied to stocks
into an IRA in Gold if you're skeptical
about the trajectory of the economy in
the US dollar then text Jordan to 989898
Birch gold group will send you a free
info kit on securing your savings with
gold with thousands of satisfied
customers five star reviews and an A
plus rating with the Better Business
Bureau we take Precious Metals seriously
text Jordan to 989898 for your free in
info kit
if you run then the signal that the
story you're acting out is that the
thing you're running from is bigger than
you and that you have to hide and that's
just a recipe for anxiety now it's not
necessarily that easy to turn and face
something but you do detail out a
variety of strategies in your books that
might help people do that you can you
can differentiate the problem like you
might you might have been traumatized at
work let's say or let's not use that
sort of jargony that jargony phraseology
you may be having tremendous
difficulties at work you might be
dealing with people who are tyrannical
at work and find it very meaningless and
so and that's bothering you constantly
it's disturbing your sleep for example
and It's haunting you and you're you
tend to try to push it out of your mind
when the thoughts come and partly that's
because the thought of how getting a new
job is so daunting that you can't face
it and one of the ways of
re-calibrating that is to break down the
problem into small and manageable steps
and so for example one of the things
that you can do
if you might have to consider getting a
new job because you're unhappy and
miserable at work is
open up your resume or your CV and look
at it right so you might not be able to
get a new job but you might be able to
open up your resume and look at it and
then having done that you've sort of
cracked the surface and then maybe you
could spend an hour a week for a month
updating it or 10 minutes a day or 10
minutes every two days something like
that but part of the trick is to take
these larger monsters that are
frightening enough so you want to run
away from them decide that you're going
to face the situation you you lay out
for example in your book you ask people
a lot of different questions about what
they're thinking and if something is
making you anxious and Afraid and
miserable it's very useful to lay out to
write out all the reasons it's making
you anxious and miserable and to ask
yourself what is it you're afraid of and
then to develop a differentiated plan
for dealing with those
so let me ask you this in your
psychoanalytic experience can somebody
can the majority of people do this by
themselves because I if I was to distill
down all of the pathologies in modern
civilization I keep coming back to a
central
one Central Point and that's that we are
desperately and pathologically and
spiritually and frighteningly lonely
yeah and I'm wondering if we we can is
it even possible anymore to tell a 21
year old boy 21 year old man
hey you need to do this by yourself or
is the because I I keep coming back to
you the first thing you do before you
start trying to solve your problems is
get a tribe get a gang get a couple of
people in your phone or get a mentor
somebody you can sit with
um and in our we've had to
professionalize it with mental health
professionals but get some people around
you
to help be a good reflective mirror for
you because we just we're loneling
ourselves to death I feel like yeah well
I I don't think that that people
took old and I think people can't do it
alone in part because people and I'm not
being snide about this people aren't
very good at thinking and they're not
very good at negotiation well and when
we're when we're anxious our brains shut
off rational thinking right it doesn't
want us wondering is that a nice bear
just wants us getting out of there well
that's that's and that's an additional
problem you know part of the reason that
Honesty in speech is so important is
that there isn't any difference between
honesty and speech and thinking so you
said can people do this alone and the
answer to that generally is no because
thought itself is generally a dialogical
process so what you and I are doing
right now is thinking things through now
we're doing that with an audience and
for an audience but you have some
propositions and I have some
propositions and we're we're pitting
them against each other
and cooperating at the same time and
we're allowing the discourse to modify
our implicit presuppositions so we're
allowing the discourse to modify our
stories and thought itself is
internalized dialogue
or trialogue if you're really
sophisticated maybe you can break
yourself into three people internally
and have an argument but it's very very
difficult for people to develop a
systematic approach to thinking and then
to counter that with another
internalized systematic approach to
thinking and do all of that alone
generally what happens in a healthy
society as you're pointing out is that
we have people around us
to whom we can express our concerns
and then they react and then you react
to that and that's thought
and the fact that we would even ask
people to do that alone is an indication
as you pointed out of how isolated and
Lonesome people have become
you know you said friends or people you
can tell good things to and people you
can tell bad things to and you have
friends because friends keep you sane
and this is one of the things I liked
about your book is this insistence that
sanity in some real sense is distributed
it's not something inside your head it's
something that you find as a consequence
of being nested in a sequence in a
hierarchical sequence of proper
relationships and so if you could do it
alone man you could do it in solitary
confinement
and you know even anti-social criminals
hate solitary confinement
we're social it's
it's the way we punish prisoners right
is to put them in the hole and we've
just created a society where that's
where we choose to live uh yeah I love
the idea of um I like to think of
society it's it's evenly distributed we
carry each other's burdens in different
seasons
um and that's the way through there's
just simply moments when my wife gets
sick or my dad finds himself my aging
father is passing away
that right that's the old you know
holding your arms up in the desert
narrative right like it we need other
people to help us navigate these and how
many uh I won't I won't put my
experiences into your marriage but the
number of times over the two decades
I've been married that I've been hanging
out with some friends that I trust and I
say my wife said this and this and my
friends go man she's right you're an
idiot right and so I need that sort of
iron sharpening iron right to help me
reframe something that my body's taken
off on yeah well a good definition of
sanity in some real sense and and I
don't mean this in a trivial or a Coy
way is that
you're saying if you can behave well
enough
that other people can stand having you
around
so that they can provide you with
corrective feedback
and if you're sane enough so that other
people can stand having you around
they'll reward you when you deserve to
be rewarded and they'll punish you when
you deserve to be punished and all you
need to do is pay really careful
attention to that feedback and you'll be
sane and properly situated now you know
that can go wrong if the entire social
Community takes a pathological turn and
that makes things more complicated and
that does happen from time to time but
generally speaking you have to be
surrounded by people and so we could
walk through that
very few people can function effectively
without an intimate relationship
that's because you don't have anybody
who's monitoring you over the medium to
long run if you don't have an intimate
relationship and so how can you how can
you organize yourself
intelligibly insanely without
the medium to long-term orientation you
just can't do it and how can you tell if
you're being a civilized human being if
you're not bouncing your behavior off
someone really close to you continually
you you can't that's right you need the
intimate relationship you need the
family parents and siblings children for
the same reason and you need friends you
talk a lot in your book about friends
and you have some good practical advice
I would say and this would be something
for us usefully to concentrate on I
would say is
you talk about how people can make
friends because people really don't know
and so maybe you could share some of
that with people who are watching and
listening
yeah I think there's there's two tracks
I want to follow and one uh we can
Circle back to this conversation we're
happening that we're having right now
evolutionarily is I think we're running
a fantastic experiment because for all
of the history of mankind nobody could
sit in and listen to you and I
dialoguing this way unless they were in
physical proximity which that physical
proximity is a form of intimacy we're
all in the same room sharing the same
meal sharing the same fire
and now we've created this bizarre
intimacy where people can drive to work
for two hours you know one way and they
can go on road trips but they're sitting
by the fire with us right and so there's
this this intellectual intimacy that's
happening but I think our bodies are
hollering at us when it comes to making
friends
um I spent a season man I was two inches
from my wife
and I was 2 000 miles away from her and
I shared a bed with a woman that I loved
and I was profoundly lonely and I always
thought lonely was
um proximal right you have nobody around
you and so I think it's proximal and
it's emotional I've I've mastered the
art of being alone I'm an introvert by
Nature just a nerd I love to read my
books and so I I mastered the art of
being alone in a crowded room I can wave
and smile and be completely on my own
planet and that has a physiological and
a spiritual cost to it and so what I had
to stop doing was beating myself up for
having a lack of character or I'm a
failure no I I needed I needed to learn
a new set of skills and that skill set
was making friends
when you're a child when you're in
middle school when you're in high school
when you're in University everything is
geared towards Community you play games
together you don't play games together
it's all about doing things together and
then you cross that graduation stage or
you get out of the army and
the world looks at you and says it's now
you versus everybody and so I think we
just have to say hey I don't have the
skill set so what do I got to do
I think we overthink it I think
Hospitality going first asking people
over to your house to your events to
your thing and just go first get over
yourself look at it as you just got to
quit smoking at some point um I just got
to make friends at some point I'm gonna
go first people are going to say no
they're going to challenge you you're
going to find out that nobody wants to
be around you so you got to go to the
mirror and ask yourself what is it about
me that I'm projecting in the world that
nobody wants to spend time with me it it
really challenges but man just let's
stop over pathologizing let's just go be
weird Coco be weird and be hospitable go
first go first yeah well you know you
you said that you're an introvert and
the thing about introverts is they often
have to learn consciously how to
socialize right because extroverts
that's right well they're tilted so hard
in that direction it just comes
naturally to them we could walk through
some of the initial stages in forming
relationships in a very behavioral
manner because people might find that
useful so Benjamin Franklin said that
one of the things you could do when you
first moved into an neighborhood was to
ask one of your immediate neighbors for
a very small favor
right and the reason for that is because
it gets the reciprocal trade
moving in the proper direction so people
like to be of service to other people
and if you ask someone to do you a very
small favor then
you put yourself in their debt and then
you can also reciprocate so you allow
them to show themselves in their best
light because you allow them to easily
indicate that they're positive and
friendly and willing to do something for
someone else and they're very happy
about that if you get it right and then
you're in their debt so you can offer to
do them a favor but but we got to be we
have to be very honest about how
counter-cultural that is now because
overnight
just with a snap of the finger
we don't ask our neighbor for a cup of
sugar anymore man we just get on Amazon
Prime and it shows up at our house or we
don't ask a friend to drive us to the
airport anymore we just click a button
on our cell phone and somebody comes and
picks us up and overnight I think we
have shifted this idea from
I'm going to honor you and allow you to
be of service to me which is a gift and
I'm going to allow my needs to be heard
out loud I need some sugar I need an egg
I need a ride I need you to help me move
right the worst call we've pathology
we've suddenly become we think we're a
burden Dr Peterson we think we are a
burden to our friends and Neighbors
and burdensomeness perceived
burdensomeness the idea that people are
better off without me that's one of the
pillars of suicidal ideation and we our
entire civilization has run that way we
are we've consider ourselves a burden
and so the very Act of asking a neighbor
to help with something is an act of
defiance in our current ERA go for it
man you want to be crazy and you want to
be counter-cultural ask somebody to help
you with something what a gift you know
well you can also do things if you move
to a new neighborhood for example
you can there'll be a local cafe
somewhere
you can go there once a week for like
several months or twice a week at a
regular time and you can introduce
yourself to the owner and you can tell
them that you've moved into the
neighborhood and you can introduce
yourself to the waiters and the
waitresses and you can become a known
fixture there and you'll start to feel
comfortable there and then you'll be
able to start to have conversations with
people there and you can do the same
thing with people at your local store
you have to and you know I had clients
who didn't even know how to introduce
themselves properly which can be a real
impediment for people so you know you
say to someone well you look them in the
eye because then you're watching their
face and then you can see how they're
reacting and your unconscious
socialization abilities will kick in if
you attend to the right cues you say
hello there I'm Jordan Peterson I just
moved into the neighborhood I'm going to
be dropping into your store pretty often
I thought I'd introduce myself and then
you stick out your hand and you look at
them and you make sure that you're
paying attention to them and not you and
you say what's your name and everyone
responds positively to that there and
maybe if they don't then it's time to
find a different corner store that's
right you know and then you try to
remember their name but if you don't you
say you know we met the other day but
I'm terrible with names I forgot your
name could you tell me again and if you
do that then you know that little corner
store then it's not completely foreign
territory and you're not alienated from
it you're going to start to feel
comfortable and the same thing is true
for this place you might go every week
you have to establish these routines of
socialization because otherwise you're
in enemy territory at least on known
territory and that's extremely hard on
you physiologically because you don't
know if you're surrounded by friends or
full eh and so it's the same with your
neighbors
you are proposing an act of Revolution
by going to a new environment and
sticking out your hand and saying hi my
name is John what is your name and
actually listening to the response that
is a revolutionary act that is a that's
a transformative I take my son he's 12
and so I've started being highly
intentional about our relationship
because I'm I'm in the early stages of
of raising what is soon to be released
in the wild a grown man and so we have
breakfast every Tuesday at this
establishment here in the States called
Waffle House it's just a chain Diner and
one of the Revolutionary acts I'm trying
to teach him is the act of
um uh radical generosity and I again I
struggle with sometimes basic hi my name
is and so the way I began doing this The
Waffle House opened in our small town
outside of Nashville Tennessee
I started over tipping in a in a
significant way because nobody wants to
be working the 6 a.m shift on a Tuesday
at a waffle house and so I told my son
hey we're gonna take care of these these
waitresses they're awesome they bring us
coffee they bring us juice they're
lovely and within a few months they know
our order when we get there they are
smiling when we walk in and it has
absolutely transitioned our social
interaction now I look forward to
spending time with my son but also
hanging out with these great waitresses
and asking about their cool tattoos
right but it's just going first it's
just going first going first going first
yeah well that emphasis on
somewhat excess generosity in those
situations is extremely useful too
because it doesn't take that much to
distinguish yourself on the attentional
front from the run of the mill customer
and you know you only need Imagine This
you probably only need
between 10 maybe under 10 places to go
in your social community in order to be
well situated and so you said is it
every week you do this with your son
yes sir okay so we could do some quick
arithmetic around that how long how long
in all does that whole event take
uh we are by the time we sit down and I
get him to school late every Tuesday
it's probably a grand total of 45
minutes okay and what about travel time
it's probably 20 minutes there so it's
about an hour and a half okay so it's 90
full circle it's 90 minutes and that's
once a week
yes sir okay so then you figure you're
awake for about 16 hours a day
and of that awake time say 12 hours is
useful for doing the sorts of things
that you're doing with your son because
you're going to spend four hours in just
self-maintenance right so let's say 12
hours 90 minutes is about approximately
one tenth of that we'll just use that as
an approximation for easy mathematics so
you've
you've fixed ten percent of one day and
there's seven days and so that's
basically three percent of your life you
fix by doing that and that means you'd
only have to fix 30 more things and
you'd have fixed a hundred percent of
your life
well you know how about you tell a story
in your book about one of your friends
who was talking about exercise and
health and he said to you
change the things you do every day
the things that repeat those are your
life
that's the routine around which your
life is built people very much overvalue
special occasions and vacations and that
sort of thing and they don't pay nearly
enough attention to the kind of thing
you're doing with your son it's like
that's once a week you might be able to
do that for years it's three percent of
your life if you get that perfect now
you've got three percent taken care of
and you can move to the next small piece
and do the same thing you do that with
some friends and you you do that with
your wife for example a couple of times
a week for a couple hours a couple of
hour sessions you know one of the things
I found in my practice was that this is
useful for people who are trying to
embark on an intimate relationship is
you need you need to talk to your wife
about the domestic economy and the
practicalities of your life together for
about 90 minutes a week
and you need to date at least once a
week that for that length of time or or
maybe twice if you can manage that and
if you don't do that you will become
isolated and lonely and you'll develop a
backlog of communication and if you
don't fix that you'll end up divorced
and then you'll be fixing it for the
rest of your life
absolutely absolutely and whenever a
backlog of communication I love that I
love that idea as though I'm just
putting rocks in a backpack and
eventually that backpack's going to wear
me down if I don't have a regular
practice of of communication and again I
somehow this became a moral or character
logical issue I think it's a skills
issue man I think taking some of the
drama and smoke out of it and just
saying hey I don't know how to I don't
know how to tell you wife I've never
seen it done I didn't see it at my house
growing up I've never seen it I don't
know how to do this so I want to
practice once a week let's go over our
calendar let's go over our budget like
how are we going to spend money this
week
um and let's practice I'm going to try
to tell you what I need this week about
five years ago my marriage was
um I mean we were hanging on by a
spider's web just hanging on and so my
wife and I realized we we gotta if we're
gonna hang on to this thing we're gonna
have to rebuild it out of Ash right and
I can't tell you I'm a six foot two 195
pound I lived in Texas my whole life
Texas male
what it took for me to look across the
table and tell my wife
I just occasionally want you to tell me
that you're proud of me that was a hard
thing for me to say and I didn't even
realize how desperately I've been
searching for her approval for the first
15 years we'd been married and how much
I kept going out on a limb and on a limb
and on a limb and I was taking her
non-response as rejection and I never
put my needs out there and I was
embarrassed and ashamed to say it and
then she said man that would have been
super helpful 15 years ago and now she
makes it a regular she makes it a
regular practice of our marriage to say
hey I see you and I appreciate what
you're doing for our family golly what a
gift and I didn't know that uh doing the
dishes was akin to foreplay great I will
knock those dishes out all day long it's
about practicing saying your needs out
loud and then man get out of your head
the number of hours I've spent
researching workout programs when I
could have just gone to work out or
researching how to tell your wife
instead of just telling her what a waste
of time we have we have too much data
man we have too much information we need
to go do go do go act go well you can
you can have a preliminary conversation
with your partner let's say and say
something like look we need to tell each
other what we need and want
and we're both too stupid to do that
because we don't really know what we
even want and we have almost no practice
at it and worse here's something about
that that's really quite sad and
frightening is like
you know if one of the things you wanted
to hear is that your wife was grateful
to you for let's say providing property
for the family so say proud of you
there's a a part of you that's quite
insecure that wants that message and
You're vulnerable on that point hey and
so then if you share that vulnerability
the person with whom you're sharing it
knows exactly where to stick you if they
want and so it's real trust to do that
but the alternative is assuming that and
people do this all the time they'll say
things like well if you love me you'd
know what I wanted it's like well first
of all that's a pretty perfect love and
second I'm not Clairvoyant right yeah
well right well you're not even smart
enough to do that for yourself most of
the time someone else and so you know
you can make an agreement with your
partner and say look um
here's something I'd like to hear you
say and here's the words I'd like to
hear will you just say that another
person might object and they'll say well
that's that sounds false if I do it or
it won't be real because we're just
practicing it and it's it's artificial
and then you think well wait a second
we're going to be together for the next
10 000 days
if it takes yeah yeah or more and if it
takes 20 stupid practices to get it
right that's not so much stacked up over
ten thousand days you know and it might
be with many marriages I would say
there's probably 10 things that each
person wants to hear on a quasi-regular
basis that would make the difference
between the marriage succeeding and the
marriage failing but it means you have
to sit down with your partner and say
look we should decide jointly what we
need and want and we should have enough
courage to try to express ourselves
stupidly in the attempt to get it and
then allow ourselves to make mistakes
you know while we're practicing
I love that I find that we've become
goal obsessed and so if I want to do
these things so that I can keep my
marriage I find that I end up way out on
a limb I find out by chasing somewhere I
don't want to go
I find it more valuable to say I want to
live a life that is not not chasing
happiness because that's just cocaine
and cotton candy but I want to chase a
life of joy and all of the data tells me
a good marriage a good connection with
the Romantic intimate partner over a
long period of time is the best bet I
have in maximizing joy and so if I'm
going to do that that means I've got to
be awkward and by the way if you can
stand in front of somebody naked and say
do you see me and you think I'm
beautiful do you want to join bodies
with me surely you can say hey
when I see dishes in the sink it makes
me feel like I'm not being the Romantic
partner I feel like I'm less of a wife
because I've created this narrative in
my head that this is what a perfect wife
does or a perfect husband does can you
help with the dishes good gosh you can
do you stand in front of somebody naked
and say Here I Am surely you can say hey
can you help with the dishes right and
then we have to be stop being so
um looking for
people coming at us what's that great
saying what have you go looking for in
the world you're sure to find start
receiving those that feedback as an
invitation not as a you've been screwing
this up right because my wife could have
heard that me saying hey I just want you
to say you're proud of me every once in
a while as me throwing a grenade right
you're failing me because you're not
doing these things that's she took it as
here's an invitation here's a way you
can love me better and what a gift man
what a gift yeah well you could get over
ourselves man you can help people box
those sorts of things in too by saying
look
let's make this discussion about the
smallest thing possible
right we're not we're not opening up
Pandora's Box and assessing the validity
of our entire marriage we're going to
try to get one small thing slightly
better
and we're going to assume that lots of
things are going well and so we're going
to sit down for 90 minutes a week maybe
that's not all at once and we're going
to share what's on our minds and we're
going to talk about what we would like
to see happen and how we would respond
positively to that and we're not going
to LEAP to the conclusion that that's a
generic criticism of the whole marriage
this is partly also why people don't
have these conversations hey especially
when they have developed a backlog of
communication so my wife and I had a
rule too which was well we had a couple
of rules that helped us along with this
to to not have the backlog and one of
the rules was
don't agree to anything that you don't
agree to
because the last thing well the last
thing I wanted to hear
five years down the road after we had
embarked on a particular pathway was
well I didn't really want to do that but
I just went along with it because I
thought you wanted to it's like well
what now am I what am I supposed to do
about that
you know that was five years ago and we
talked about it and I didn't want you to
agree because you thought it was easier
to agree I wanted a consensus you know
and so and the corollary to that was if
we're going to talk about something that
needs to be addressed now and that will
be fixed in the future we don't get to
drag up the past because that's another
thing that happens right is you start
talking about things that are
problematic and one person or the other
goes well you've you always act like
this you've always acted like this and
there's no chance in the future that
you're ever going to change it's like
well instantly you're in a fight because
your whole character past present and
future has just been Savaged when when
the conversation should be something
like uh our meal times might go 15
percent better if after you were done
eating and you and we had all finished
you brought your dishes to the sink and
rinsed them off and put them in the
dishwasher and here's what I'm willing
to do in return for that
well I like to I like to even take it
one step further and personalize it
because I find I react when somebody
says you need to as soon as somebody
points their finger at me I I just I am
fully limbic man I go I go fight or
flight instantly
and so I I tend to say hey
uh here's a good example I I work here
at Ramsey Solutions in Nashville and uh
have a history of helping people get out
of debt pay their financial debts off
and work together as a community and as
a couple to pay the debts off
one of the most common questions we get
is how do I get my partner on board like
he wants to just buy a huge pickup truck
and buy the biggest house and he's run
the credit cards up and I keep coming to
him with these numbers and it's it's
very short or it's not about numbers and
if you come at somebody like you need to
sell your truck and you do this well now
you've started a war
there's a difference when you sit down
and say hey I'm scared to death and I
can't breathe because we are so indebted
there's something about saying it would
really be a gift to me if when dinner
was over if you took and rinsed your
plate and just took six seconds to put
in the dishwasher that'd be a gift to me
that's different than you need to take
your dishes out right in one of those
puts me on the defensive one of those is
an invitation and I've just decided man
my life is too short to continue to
to do anything other than invitations
except in very few moments
while today's cups of coffee often come
with hints of soy and social justice our
new coffee sponsor delivers an entirely
different experience it's bold strong
delicious and overall as good as the
causes it supports I'm speaking of
course about Black Rifle coffee many of
you know about Black Rifle already it's
a veteran founded and operated Coffee
Company who have made it their mission
to hire 10 000 veterans and they're well
on their way
by purchasing for Black Rifle Coffee
Company you're directly supporting the
military service Community but what
about the coffee itself well it's bold
strong and really good
go to Black riflecoffee.com and use
promo code Jordan for 10 off your first
order or when you sign up for a new
coffee Club subscription the
subscription gives you free shipping on
all coffee Club orders Early Access to
Club deals and promotions and special
discounts from their partner brands
that's black riflecopy.com with promo
code Jordan for 10 off your first order
or when you sign up to become a coffee
Club member Black Rifle coffee
supporting veterans and America's coffee
yeah yeah well that conversation about
debt too is one of the ways that you
cooperate and negotiate with your spouse
and your friends your family for that
matter is also to jointly develop
something like
a joint vision
you know because you might be able to
sit down with your wife and say well
look if we could have the dinner times
that we really wanted
if they were optimal like you've done
with your son let's say what would that
look like
well let's say yeah a couple of kids you
think well do we all want to sit down
together as a family that's a quick this
has to be a question right to both of
you yes that you're actually imagining
do we all want to sit down okay yes well
how often do we want to do that like
seven nights a week is this something
that's actually a crucial foundation for
our family or can we do it five nights a
week and maybe do something different on
Friday and you think well do all those
micro things have to be negotiated and
the answer is those aren't micro things
you do that every day they're absolutely
foundational and and then you want to
hear what the other person has to say
because if you don't they're not going
to be fully on board plus they might
have a better idea than you you never
know it's like so let's say we decide
well we're going to have dinner together
at six o'clock
five nights a week and we're gonna let
people forage one night a week and maybe
sit in front of the TV and we're gonna
go out one night a week something like
that and we'll try that for a while and
then the next question is well
what would we like to serve and who's
going to cook and who's going to clean
up and and if we wanted it to go as well
as it possibly could how are we going to
get the kids involved and do we want to
experiment with some new foods and you
know that meal time if that's the
evening meal let's say that's 90 minutes
that's more than one tenth of your day
and so that's 10 of your life that's
literally 10 of your life if you get the
evening yeah but it's bigger it's
compound interest that grows over time I
think that 10 you take care it's like
it's like putting 15 of your income in
retirement it grows to infinitely more
than 15 of your income over time yeah
right so if you take care of that ten
percent it's not just taking care of
that ten percent suddenly if your
marriage is in sync you're an infinitely
better parent right infinitely better
citizen infinitely better worker and it
becomes a much very recursive the uh uh
the famed psychiatrist William Glasser
he gave me I love this analogy he says
that
he could he his famed line was he could
fix any marriage in two sessions and he
said we think in pictures but we speak
in words and if couples can simply align
their pictures yeah then you get a very
clear path so when my wife comes to me
on a Monday and says hey uh this weekend
you and me we're gonna go on the hottest
date and then she just walks away Monday
night I'm wondering where we're going
Tuesday night I'm wondering what I'm
wearing and for how long right by
Wednesday and Thursday I'm wondering
who's going to keep the kids and I don't
care because they're going to be fine
and what hotel we're gonna end up at and
then Saturday comes along and she I show
up in a suit and she shows up in her
running shorts and a t-shirt
and I say what are you doing what and
she says what are you doing and I say I
thought we were going on a hot date and
she says
it's seven seven tacos for ten dollars
down at Taco Hut we're going on a hot
date hey I love tacos and I hope she
loves the occasional Rendezvous but we
both use the word date and we had very
different pictures now I'm upset she's
upset and we just so in our in my house
every single day of the week every day
I'm not on the road we ask ourselves
this question hey what's the picture of
today look like it's just become a
vernacular in our home and so when she
says I need some space this evening I
need some time by myself I I tend to go
okay cool after dinner and after the
kids and after you're done riding enough
I won't hassle you for the last eight
minutes of the day for her she's
thinking the moment you walk in this
house I'm out and I might come back in a
week right we just have to align our
pictures and I'm cool either way and
she's cool either way it's just managing
those expectations and being so clear
with one another yeah well that's
exactly the process of defining a shared
vision and one of the things that's
lovely about that is it makes you it
you're not reactive then so you're not
the thing that's being chased by the
monster or the dread you're the thing
that's actively conceptualizing the
manner in which the future is going to
shape itself and what you have is the
delightful opportunity to share a joint
Vision that in principle would be better
for both of you than anything you could
do alone like you said that all the data
shows that one of the best things you
can do in your life to maximize your
long-term health and increase your
probability of at least some Joy is to
have a functional long-term intimate
relationship and so you have to attend
to that and a huge part of that is the
development of these shared visions and
it's really useful to to develop micro
visions and so you know we just talked
what would you what would you tell what
would you tell clients back in the day
when they would come to you and they'd
have a three-year-old and they would
have just had and they have an infant
they have child number two
and they would say
we're not having sex anymore we have
like an intimacy we become co-managers
of our house and your response as a
clinical psychologist would be you've
got to schedule it you've got to put on
a calendar and the response always is I
don't want to do that anymore
that's a great question well my first
response is
well how often do you want to have sex
and people hate that people hate that
question and so they avoid it they say
well you know we don't really want to be
that calculating about it's like okay
right whatever
we're going to parameterize this once a
year
it's like no that's probably too little
okay 15 times a day
it's like no that's probably too much
okay so now we got some parameters here
somewhere between once a year and 15
times a day
let's see if we can narrow that in and
this does make people uncomfortable
right they don't want to specify their
needs and wants and I think it's what's
this what's the source of that
discomfort where does that come from I
think they're embarrassed that they need
anything
fundamental shame like it's that same
exposure of nakedness and then they're
they're unwilling to share the
information with their partner because
it's revealing
and then they're afraid they're going to
be rebuffed
and they're afraid they're going to get
into a fight they've got lots of reasons
not to want to do it but then that rolls
back to those stories that have been
that have been haunting them since they
were kids right yeah yeah and and they
don't want to have the difficult
conversation up front and so we might
say well okay let's let's be reasonable
about this it's going to be some number
of times a week you guys have jobs you
have kids you're busy you're not going
to have a hot date every night you just
don't have time for it and so why don't
we be reasonable about it we can try
let's aim for something like twice a
week it's like can you think or maybe we
could start with once a week
because zero once is a lot more than
zero it's a lot more than zero and so
then you think well all right
and then they say something like well
you know we did all that dating when we
were dating and and now we don't want to
do that anymore it's like okay so what
are you saying here exactly you're
saying that you don't want any more
Romance
and you don't want any more hot sex
and you don't want to put any work into
it and it's just going to happen
magically even though it's clearly not
happening
that's that's your theory and then let's
let's run that theory out okay so now
you have new kids and that's going to be
it's going to be like that for a few
years maybe till they're 10 or 11.
you're going to be occupied with your
family and so now you have a sexless
marriage with no intimacy for a decade
so what does that look like in like 2032
when you're in divorce court
that's right how's that or you're
recovering from some addiction right
right so of of work or of alcohol or
whatever it is because your body's gotta
it's got to meet that need somewhere and
if it can't get it
if it can't get it a true deep
connection it will come up with all kind
of cheap substitutes right yeah like an
affair
that's right yeah so so of course you
don't want to do this
this requires difficult
how would you like to have your marriage
deteriorate into hell over a 10-year
period how does that sound as an
alternative it's like well that's not
very good it's like okay so which of
these two things are you more afraid of
and then the when people really think
that through they think oh yeah well
maybe you know I could take the risk of
making what I want known
and then okay so now you specify it well
a date which night how long how are you
going to find a babysitter are you going
to do this every week who's going to be
responsible for what in relationship to
this date all these details have to be
negotiated and then we remember you know
by the same
logic that we've already employed if
this is two hours a week then that's
15 percent of one day that's another
five percent of your life and it's the
intimate part of your life and if you
got that right my God you might be a
much happier person
and so that's another one of the only 25
things you have to take care of to set
your life up but I mean you said why are
people afraid to do this is they're
they're afraid to show their
vulnerability man they don't trust their
partner they don't know how to negotiate
they don't even know what they want
themselves you know like it's not that
easy for someone to admit that they need
any physical attention at all even
though everyone obviously does you know
because you're putting yourself on the
line then and that is the definition of
intimacy in some sense
in today's world we sometimes lose sight
of the judeo-christian beliefs that
built our society this is why it is so
important to study scripture and develop
a dedicated prayer life there's no
better way to do that than with hallow
hallow is the number one Christian
Prayer app in the U.S and the number one
Catholic app in the world it's filled
with studies meditations and Reflections
including the number one Christian
podcast the Bible in a year download
Hollow today and try their Advent pray
25 challenge a 25-day journey through
Bible stories from both the Old and New
Testament leading up to the birth of
Jesus these meditations are led by cast
members from the largest Christian
streaming Series in history The Chosen
Advent pray 25 will help grow your
understanding of mankind and develop a
disciplined prayer habit during the
season when our discipline is put to the
test download hallow for three months
completely free and experience a
personal development that can come from
regular prayer meditation and reflection
on who the Bible calls us to be get
Hollow for free at hallow.com Jordan
it's hallow.com Jordan give yourself the
gift of Peace calm and discipline this
Christmas go to Holiday dot com slash
Jordan today
absolutely absolutely I I I can't
tell you and I know you've experienced
this too whether it's whether it's a
single mom with three kids just trying
to figure out what day it is or it's a
multi-multi-millionaire who's got
resources that far exceed anything I
could imagine
I've I've rarely rarely sat down across
from somebody and had them be able to
articulate what do you actually want
they cannot answer that question and
they fill it with addictions they fill
it with Hobbies they fill it with uh
dopamine Chase they fill it with so much
stuff and nobody can answer that
question what do you want because I we
just don't have a culture that has a
shared vision of where we're headed we
have a culture of you're hurting in
somebody else's fault and let's let's
start pointing fingers and man we've got
to circle the wagons on a shared Vision
moving forward yeah because what do you
want no that's not a question anybody
asks it's what do I don't want and why
am I feeling just uncomfortable it's
about them it's because of him it's
because then if it's what you don't want
you're driven by negative emotion if
you're if you're running from not to
if you're driven by a vision that's
positive emotion because approaching
something positive in a Visionary manner
generates positive emotion if you're
only fleeing from things you don't want
then you're constantly in a state of
anxiety and depression that's how it
works because where did that go
where did we lose a shared Vision why
can't somebody put a flag in the ground
and say this is where we're headed that
seems to be gone
yeah well that's a complicated question
you know I mean I would say that's the
consequence in the most fundamental
sense of uh of of the death of God in
the most fundamental way it's the death
of it's the death of a sense of higher
order Unity eh now it's also a very
complicated question if you ask someone
what do you want if you could ask your
wife that what do you want you'll
probably freeze her into immobility
because
it it's really like asking how do you
want all of your life to go please
summarize and one of the things yeah
well it's it's a lot you know and one of
the ways that you can deal with that
which you undoubtedly know as a as a as
someone who's conversant with cognitive
behavioral techniques is you can ask
people more micro questions too about
what they want so you might say well
well we did that on The Dating front
already right we talked about that we
talked about how you might think about
how you want your meal times to go we
only talked about dinner time but you
could talk about breakfast and lunch as
well and then you and there are other
micro domains that are very crucial that
you can also consider it's like so you
could ask yourself
well if you could have the education you
wanted
what would that look like if you were on
if you had the jobber career track that
would motivate you just hypothetically
what might that look like sketch out a
bad plan
um if you had some friends do you well
first do you want some friends and if so
how many and and if you had friends and
the right number
how much time per week would you like to
spend with them
and if you had some time outside of work
and familial responsibilities what might
you like to do with your time that you
would really like to do and the thing
about these questions is that they're
they're real questions you know there's
this gospel statement that if you knock
the door will open and that if you ask
you will receive and if you search
you'll find if you seek you'll find and
people
who are faithless in some sense think
about it as kind of a Hallmark greeting
card approach to the world it's just
well you just ask for things and they
appear it's like no
that isn't what any of that means it
means
nothing that you want will manifest
itself unless you aim for it and you
won't aim for it unless you know what it
is and you won't know what it is unless
you ask yourself and then you might say
well why don't you ask yourself and the
answer is well maybe no one ever
explained to you that you needed to
which is a crucial issue and then maybe
you don't also trust yourself
you know because you might think well if
I let myself know what I wanted given my
bloody track record I would do
everything I could to screw it up so
I'll just keep myself opaque to myself
so that I don't fail at something that's
truly important and then I can always
I can always Regale with myself with the
idea that well I didn't succeed but I
didn't really try had I really tried I
might have succeeded whereas if you let
yourself know what you want and then you
try you also set the preconditions for
failure so it's risky but the
alternative is well
you don't know what you want so it is a
meditative practice like okay if I could
have what I wanted
imagine the world was constituted so
that the entire planet wouldn't explode
in an apocalypse if I got what I needed
and wanted
yeah right it's like what would that be
you know what time okay so is this is
this
is this a cognitive well I don't want to
use jargon is this a thought exercise or
is this a
feeling exercise because here's what I'm
seeing across the country
I thought it would feel different when I
finally got that associate Vice
President John yeah I thought I would
feel a certain way when I got a car I
thought if I could just get to her to
date me I would feel a certain way and
people are are realizing in Rapid
fashion I thought if my politician won I
would suddenly feel a certain way here's
a great I I testified in a court case
against somebody years ago a former
student of mine
um got into some significant some really
terrible things
um and he got a long jail sentence
and the next morning I woke up and I
read what the judge had written and in
the sentencing and I
he the judge used some of my words and I
remember feeling sick to my stomach and
I called the mentor of mine a psychology
friend uh professor of mine and asked
her I said man I feel gross and she said
John nobody wins here and I had this
perception that I was going to feel a
certain way when Justice was done and
the right thing happened
and I realized man I had thought this
through cognitively but I had not
managed how are you going to actually
feel because nobody wins somebody's life
is ruined over here somebody's life is
still ruined over here
I think we have to I don't know let me
uh you're you're infinitely
um you've got infinitely more wisdom
than I do on this but I find that the
cognitive exercise is helpful but it
really is important to sit down and say
okay how are you gonna feel five days
after you've bought this car that you
think you have to have well okay so the
first thing is is that
the probability that you'll be happy
because you've accomplished something
in any permanent sense is virtually zero
and the reason yes thank you for saying
that well the reason for that is that
isn't what positive emotion is for
positive emotion is to indicate that
you're making progress towards a valued
goal
now that's the driver right not not the
Finish Line exactly well and that's
actually pharmacologically separate
right because a satiation reward which
would be the accomplishment of something
calms you and stops that program from
running so for example once you've
become vice president if that was your
goal then the whole pursuing vice
president program comes to a halt now
the problem with that is it leaves you
without a goal
and it also leaves empty space which you
immediately have to fill and so often
people feel disquiet because now they
don't know what to do and they miss that
rush because they're no longer pursuing
something and so it's very important to
know that positive emotion is
experienced in relationship to a valued
goal and then the question becomes well
what's the most valuable goal to pursue
and that's really a metaphysical and a
theological question
in terms of the mechanics of feeling so
imagine that you're
negotiating the structure of a date with
your wife and you're developing a shared
vision and so you say well on Wednesday
nights once a week we're going to go for
dinner and maybe you specify the
restaurant and you're going to make the
arrangements and I'm going to get
dressed up and then we're going to go
see a movie and you're going to pick the
movie and and then we're going to have a
romantic interlude afterwards and we'll
we'll run that and see how it goes and
then what you want to do is you want to
picture that
and you want to watch how your body
reacts
on the emotional level
and and that's a that's a bit of honesty
it's right and you can see well if we
went to this restaurant oh I don't
really like that restaurant I think it's
kind of expensive I had a bad time with
waiters I don't think I'd be happy there
then you say those things to your
partner you say well I'm thinking this
through I'm imagining it and here's the
objections that are coming up maybe
they're wrong maybe I've got this wrong
but I'd like to hear your input because
you know we want to get this right
should we reevaluate my feelings about
the restaurant or should we think about
a different restaurant and that should
be a question because you don't know
maybe you're just stupid about the
restaurant or you're cheap or you're
afraid to go there because you don't
have the right clothes I mean you don't
know right but if you want to get your
feelings in line you develop the vision
and then you you you apprehend the
vision with your feelings it's kind of
what you do when you go to a movie and
you fall into the fantasy of the
character you know you embody all the
emotions and you evaluate it that way
and so
and and the other problem with that more
goal directed approach that you
described is like I think people should
plan and they should develop a vision
you have to develop the vision and then
be somewhat detached from it because it
needs to be updated right and modified
and hold it Loosely yeah yeah you hold
it Loosely yeah that's right because
you're fallible and maybe you can come
up with a better plan not every minute
because you'll drive yourself mad that
way but but now and then or I I I I I
was obsessed as a young higher education
professional with becoming a college
President until
I sat down at the senior leadership
table and I realized I I want that life
I don't want I don't want that that life
I don't want 24 7 365 and the politics I
don't want it asking for money I don't
want that life and I didn't have I
didn't have a backup plan I didn't know
what to do I was right like you nailed
it I was completely rudderless because
I'd made the finish line
the the goal going all the way back full
circle to the how you open the
conversation I think that becomes really
important to lay out an identity and
reverse engineer who do I want to be who
do I want to become and the goals end up
you know it's like the old days
um when you went to grad school a PhD
was simply
a a it was a a high five on a journey of
of continued learning I'm gonna continue
going down this rabbit hole and now it's
become a destination and people walk out
and announce themself as educated
because I've I've crossed this Finish
Line just because you get across a you
run a marathon or walking Marathon it
doesn't mean you're fit right doesn't
mean you're healthy well we did we
talked about
the necessity of goals and so
there's higher order goals and and you
need the higher order goals because they
integrate you and a goal of becoming a
college President is a higher order goal
then no goal at all in just sitting in
your bed and eating Cheetos right it's a
better plan than no plan at all but but
and this is where things become profound
and serious and I would say even in in a
religious sense because what's religious
is about what's profound and serious in
some sense by definition so you might
say well who should I be and you might
think well I should be the college
President I should have this car I
should have this house those are all
very particularized versions of yourself
and the problem with them is is that
their concrete and final actualities and
not processes and so here's a good
Vision that's a high order vision and I
think it's the vision that our whole
culture is founded on I should be the
person who genuinely confronts the
problems and challenges that confront me
in my life
so that's that's a that's an attitude of
active and voluntary engagement right
I'm gonna that's what identity yeah yeah
and yeah that that's a nice it's an
identity of process as well it's like
I'm going to be someone who doesn't shy
away from the challenges of life yes
okay and I'm a guy who confronts it
right right and so that's Saint George
and the Dragon and that's that's a
precondition for therapeutic
transformation because in order for you
to improve you have to identify the
problem the dragon and you have to be
willing to face it voluntarily
and so you say to yourself I'm going to
do what I can to develop the courage to
confront the problems in my life
voluntarily that's who I want to be and
then another element of that is
oh I can't do that without telling the
truth
I have to be willing to see what's in
front of me
and I have to be willing to admit to
myself what I think and feel and I have
to be willing to communicate that and so
you could say well that makes you that
makes your goal something like to think
about it archetypally you talked about
jungian approaches earlier is that that
makes you into a truth-telling hero
and then maybe underneath that it's like
well could I become College president
could I be successful in my business
could I be successful in my marriage
it's like that's all well and good and
those are more concretized goals but the
the highest order goal has to be
something like an approach rather than a
final state
right because you might say
the approach never ends that's right
well and you can say to yourself I want
to be the guy who listens to my wife
yeah okay so you're never gonna you're
never gonna finalize that right because
you're doing that all the time and
that's also really useful because you
don't hit the target and then and then
find yourself left with nothing because
you can do that every day I want to be
the guy who listens to my kids I want to
be the guy who pays attention to my
friends and I want to be the guy who
speaks my mind carefully and judiciously
it's like you can bring that anywhere
man
and you're you're and you're talking
you're talking about
the difference there that approach let's
let's use your example I'm a I want to
be a guy who's a good Steward of my wife
I want to be that's that's my identity
and that means I'm gonna have to
backfill it with some goals we're gonna
meet once a week and I'm not gonna try
to fix her like she's a car engine I'm
not gonna try to solve her problems with
her as though she's infantile I'm gonna
just listen and I'm gonna commit to
being quiet and so when she says I'm
really struggling with my boss at work
I'm not going to jump in with well you
know you should probably tell him I'm
just gonna I'm just gonna listen right
but listen over time I begin I really
look forward to learning more about my
wife and what she's experiencing in this
season and it's different than last
season it's going to be different in the
new season I think it was uh Esther
perel who said if most adults have four
or five great loves in their lifetime
and if you work really really hard it's
with the same person and you become part
of their journey and now I can't wait to
hear about what my wife's been reading
who she's becoming and how I can best be
a be a partner to her in this new season
whatever it is it's not constantly
trying to get back to remember how much
fun we have and we were dating man what
a waste of a life let's go this way
right let's move forward I think
tell me if I'm if I'm on the right track
here
that idea of owning acknowledging
reality
I didn't mean to but I'm looking in the
mirror and I've gained 100 pounds I
didn't mean to I it wasn't my intention
but now I've spent 15 years in a middle
manager job and I hate my life I hate
going to work every day I think we do
not have the skill set for one of the
most important psychological functions
that we just we just extract we just
just took it out of life right and I
think it's it's Ernest Becker's work and
yolom's work I think we don't have uh
any sort of
um ability to grieve privately or as a
group we've lost a skill set of grief
and so we can't acknowledge reality
because we don't know what to do when we
look in the mirror and say I didn't
measure up to who I wanted to be I
didn't mean to yell at my kid and I did
I didn't mean to get another dessert and
I did
we can't deal with that grief and so we
Blow by it and say you keep putting
desserts in front of me or if you had
just picked up your trike six-year-old I
wouldn't have yelled at you we just
Outsource our dysfunction everywhere
because we can't sit in that gap between
what we wanted and our reality all right
so a couple of things there you talked
about
finding yourself on the adventure of
transformation with your wife now often
men feel compelled
obligated
to generate a solution to the problems
that their wives bring them
and it is the case because women feel
more negative emotion that they are more
likely to bring up problems that's why
70 percent of divorces by the way are
initiated by women it's because they
feel more negative emotions so if the
relationship is shaky they're going to
suffer for it more first
and they probably feel more negative
emotion because they're more sensitive
because they have to take care of
infants
and so anyways we can put that aside now
it might be that you should help your
wife solve her problems
and maybe she's coming to you for that
but one thing you need to understand and
you might understand this as a
diagnostician is well do you know what
the hell her problem is
and the answer is well probably not
because she doesn't even know so why
does she want to sit down and tell you
about her problems and the answer is
because she wants to find out what her
bloody problems are and so you see this
very often in therapy you know when Carl
Rogers made a lot of this he said you
know if you just listen to people
they'll often solve most of their
problems themselves and so somebody
comes in and they say well I'm really
upset
and you say well what's on your mind now
what's so interesting about that is
often the people who are in therapy have
absolutely no one
to tell their problems to
you know like I think I think the
rogerian magic though was listening and
he brought that other that other side of
the equation that we we leave out he
listened and he genuinely did his best
to love the person in front of him yeah
well okay so not sit in Judgment of that
person so my wife says Hey I'm going
through this I I instantly go well you
know you should instead of sitting back
and going I love this person tell me
let's connect not let's solve right yeah
so so you you'd hope that your mindset
and this would be part of establishing
that high order goal is imagine you
would like your wife and you to have a
good life
and so when you're listening to her
that's uppermost in your mind we're
trying to have a good life here okay so
what's your problem well if you're
listening to someone therapeutically
they're going to
scatter shot the problem
they're going to say well it might be
this and it might be this and it might
be this it might have something to do
with the past and it might be this and
it's it's quite a mess as they try to
calibrate the real problem
and you have to listen to all that and
what you'll find is that the person will
dispense with most of those hypotheses
themselves as soon as they utter them
they'll think well here's my problem no
that's not exactly right and so now
that's off the table and they'll say
well it might be this and here's some
reasons for thinking that but no it's
probably not that and so what you'll
find is the problem space will clear now
Rogers also pointed out and this is very
useful is that one of the things you can
do when you're listening apart from
asking questions which might be well I
don't quite understand what you meant by
that or you said something 10 minutes
ago and it seems to contradict what you
just said now
which are just helpful questions the
other thing you can do is summarize and
you can say well I've been listening for
10 minutes or 15 minutes and it seems to
me that this is what you said is that
right and that people really like that
for for two reasons a is one is you
compact all that searching into the gist
and that's a gift you can give someone
and then also if you hit the target if
you say yeah that's exactly what I meant
then they know full well that you've
really been listening
and so if you can if you're a man and
you're listening to this and you want to
know how to deal with your wife when
she's presenting you with problems the
first thing is is step back a bit and
say look she probably has to go through
the whole problem set and try not to
take that personally just listen and and
and you can summarize and you can ask
questions but mostly you want to find
out well what the hell is the problem
here now you might want to LEAP to a
solution for for a bunch of reasons one
is well to show that you have a solution
two is to show you're smarter than your
wife which is very bad idea the third is
to shut her up so that you don't have to
sit there and listen and that's also a
really bad idea because you can't shut
anybody up about an actual problem
right that just doesn't work because
it's an actual problem it's not going to
go away or if she's coming to you to
connect and she's not looking for your
solution she just wants to connect and
this is the tool set that she has when
you shut her up you're giving a much
more existential
I don't value you right I don't want to
connect with you
um and that's a much bigger
um I think that's a much more crisis or
your relationship's in a mess at that
point yeah well that yes exactly well
and you'll find too with this 90 minutes
a week that you have to listen to each
other is that in some sense you need
that amount of time to clear the air
because you can imagine that as you move
through life Little Dragons make
themselves manifest all the time because
things change the car needs maintenance
there's a problem with the kid there's
something wrong with the bathroom sink
um we don't have quite enough money in
the checking account you know there's a
hundred little niggling demons that pop
up constantly and it's very difficult to
establish the preconditions for joyful
intimacy when there's a nest of micro
dragons swarming all over the house and
you have to
talk those through in order to keep them
small and to make them go away and if
you do that with some degree of
programmatic regularity then you do have
the possibility that you'll get beyond
the mere sharing of problems then you
can have some fun then you can play
yes but I think
uh two things one
here a helpful tip for the listeners
here there's been fantastic in my
marriage is when my wife sits down and
begins to talk I'll often stop at the
very beginning and say are you asking me
for a solution or are you looking to
just tell me are you looking to connect
and that is often frames the
conversation in a way that I know where
I what what she's asking from me and it
seems very unromantic at first but man
on the back end it saves so it's just
like putting sex on the calendar right
it just a couple of seconds of awkward
changes the trajectory of your entire
week and month I also think that men
have rightly or wrongly we found
ourselves
we don't understand our relational value
and so we think our value can only be
found in offering a solution to
something
and there's a deeper intimacy there's a
deeper connection
um my wife values me simply because I am
her husband yes I help provide and yes
I've I you know can do all these other
things there's utility there
but I have to see myself as having more
value than giving a person less with
less power or less smarts than me an
answer
sometimes the greatest gift I can give
her is simply my presence right and we
have to get underneath that discomfort
of
I I'm out of my depths here I don't know
what to do other than just listen and I
feel useless I feel like I've lost
utility right yeah well the I think the
problem with that formulation is the
idea of just listening it's really hard
to listen
and there's almost I like that I like
that well there's almost nothing you can
do that's more transformative to that
than that and the reason for that is
that just listening gives the other
person an opportunity to just think
and so then you might say well what are
they doing when they're thinking and
here's what they're doing is they're
asking themselves questions and looking
for a revelation they're trying to sort
through information so that they can
determine the best pathway forward and
they're trying to update and develop
their vision for their life
and you do that in abstraction
to test out the possibilities before you
implement them and so if you give people
space to think which is exactly what
you're doing when you're listening then
they try out different versions of
themselves so they can experiment with
finding the best fit and so there's
nothing just about listening it's I
think apart from
speaking accurately and carefully and
truthfully there isn't anything more
difficult that you can do than to listen
and one of the things I loved about
being a therapist and it's been very
useful to me in my post therapy career
as well is that if you actually listen
to people they will tell you everything
and then they're so interesting you can
hardly stand them
so give me
um and by proxy The Listener give a 22
to 27 year old
man trying to make his way in the world
what is one or two or three things I I
guess I'm turning the interview around
on you now what's a couple of
practical skills that I can do to lean
into listening to practice listening
and stop trying to rush to a solution
try to get out of a a conversation
because I'm uncomfortable I don't have
the skill set I never saw my dad do it
my granddad never did it they just they
just barked orders and watched the game
I'm trying to do something that is
infinitely more difficult than just
flipping channels and yelling at the
Packers game what what's a couple of
things I can practice well I would say
first is
have some faith in your own reactions
not as
solutions to the problem but as points
of inquiry so for example
when we're talking
questions arise in the theater of my
imagination
and topics pop up and I'm willing to put
them on the table and the reason they
they pop up is because I'm attending to
what you say and that's generating some
thoughts in my mind and one of the great
things you can do with people is ask
them questions
I mean there is nothing and this goes
back to the the issue of say making
friends or establishing relationships
there's nothing that people want more
than to be attended to that's why
advertisers spend so much money trying
to Garner attention that's why social
media companies spend so much money
garnering people's attention attention
is the fundamental currency
and so people love to be attended to and
so you dispense with the idea that
you're just listening is you're watching
the other person and you're listening
and then you're attending to yourself
and watching and listening because
you'll see that as you focus on the
conversation and don't worry about what
you're going to say next or how you
appear which makes you self-conscious
and miserable and awkward instantly you
pay attention to the conversation and
then you watch what happens inside and
this question comes up and you say well
I have this question
and you don't evaluate the question you
you know not if you're deeply engaged in
the conversation you just lay it out and
you you pull you draw the person out and
you see well I don't quite understand
what you said there or it seems to me
that this is a different way of looking
at it what do you think of that the
questions have to be honest but if you
if you pay focused attention and you ask
genuine questions you've got like 90
percent of social skill nailed
and you get below you get below I love
what you said about the Little Dragons I
might I might steal that down the road
you get beneath the
hey
did you see what was on the news today
or hey we're overdrawn on our checking
account you get beneath those things to
the real statement which is I'm scared
or I feel lonely or I miss you right
these truly intimate connections if
you'll just if you'll yeah if you'll
just wade into the uncomfortable Waters
of discourse well I and I think the way
to fortify yourself in relationship to
that I mean I've been embroiled in a lot
of conflict
and I really don't like conflict
and I think the reason that I've been
embroiled in so much is because I won't
delay it like if there's an issue at
hand I want to address it right now and
the reason for that isn't that I enjoy
it in fact I don't enjoy it at all but
what I really don't enjoy is
prolonged conflict that never goes
anywhere and that never ends
and so conflict delayed is conflict
Amplified exactly just it just grows on
you exactly that and and that's one of
the oldest stories that people have been
telling each other forever is that
ignored things grow in the darkness
outside the city until they become
monstrous and Break Down the Walls
and so you think well I'm afraid of
having I'm afraid of listening I'm
afraid of hearing the problems and
that's fair enough it's no wonder you're
afraid but you're nowhere near afraid
enough of not doing that because that's
a bloody catastrophe that'll be a bomb
that'll go off in 10 years and blow up
your marriage you'll find out that your
wife had an affair because well for her
own reasons and because you didn't pay
any attention to her for like 15 years
and then you think well I was afraid to
pay attention and yeah fair enough but
now look where you are you're you're in
hell and and that's just not an
improvement
and so how do you know in our current
ecosystem how do you know when to Wade
through uh my little brother sent me
something the other day that was like in
2000 Y2K was going to kill us all in
2001 I don't remember what it was like
swine flu is going to kill us all in
2003 like there's just this Litany of we
rally around this the next end thing
that's gonna happen and then we've
reached this
um this fatigue right and we like
there's true cancers out there that are
coming for us that we're just like dude
I don't have the energy anymore I'm
moving on about my day I've been really
trying to think that through and so
here's some guidelines that I've sort of
developed over the last few months
so you know there's there's problems of
various size out there in the world and
the largest problems are the apocalyptic
problems that you just described
right and it isn't even obvious which of
those apocalyptic problems are real but
we could say well there's always the
possibility that large-scale systems
will come to a precipitous collapse
and we have to live with that that's
true in our own lives we could die at
any moment so look at the people we love
like our cultures can fall apart the
apocalyptic terror is always beckoning
as a possibility
okay now the question is is that your
problem
now the answer you do anything about it
right the answer is your own nervous
system will tell you that
because imagine that you're imagine
you're facing a problem that's so big
that it paralyzes you and it turns you
into a tyrant
okay that's too big a problem for you
obviously and what you have to do is you
have to scale back the problem
until you find a dragon that's a size
that you're willing to contend with that
you'll actually contend with and so you
know maybe you shouldn't be addressing
the large-scale political problems of
the world because your own house is a
bloody catastrophe and you watch the
news and it paralyzes you and turns you
into a ranting Tyrant and that means
you're not the man for that job
you have to scale back and maybe if you
scale backed and practiced straightening
things up at the local level which are
which isn't trivial or easy you get
better and better at it and then you
could face larger and larger
catastrophes and and and practically and
productively right instead of virtue
signaling and going astray you know you
do this in therapy is if if someone
is having a hard time making friends you
break that down into micro steps and one
thing you might have to do as we
discussed is you might have to teach the
person to introduce themselves
you know and their problem is I don't
have any friends it's like no no your
problem is you don't know how to shake
hands and look someone in the eye
right and then you might say well can
you do that and they might say well I'm
afraid to shake hands it's like well can
you look at me
can you stretch out your hand
you know can you touch my hand I mean
this might sound trivial but lots of
people are paralyzed with social anxiety
and they have no idea how to shave your
hands yeah yeah yeah there and that just
stops them cold right because if you
can't introduce yourself how the hell
are you going to make friends
that's right well it's it's being
when our bodies take off on us I love
how you said that man because our
nervous system tells the truth generally
can I listen to my body and just instead
of rushing to the diagnostic and rushing
to Google or rushing to a WebMD trying
to can I just ask myself what's my body
trying to protect me from like what whoa
I just walked into a room full of people
and my heart rate just went up to 200
beats uh per minute and I can't my hands
are getting sweaty what are you trying
to protect me from these are my people
these are my friends this is my this is
a wedding I got invited to oh okay I I
used to not be safe in this situation
I'm safe now I'm okay now and I can
think that through that gap between
instead of racing over to the bar to
grab a drink to quiet that alarm system
or to race over to the snack table and
get a piece of cake which is what I go
that's quite the alarm system I'm a good
Southern Christian so I like to eat my
feelings like I instead of those issues
I can just be really curious and I'm not
gonna go to war with my body and try to
shut the alarms off I'm just going to
listen to him and say hey what's it
trying to tell me right now well you you
talked about thinking in images before
so here's a very useful thing the
psychoanalysts learn to do so imagine
you do go to a social occasion and you
find as you enter the Hall you you're
getting nervous and sweaty
now if you watch this is why Carl Jung
for example believed that we lived
through a dream we lived life through a
dream
so and that's a story and so what you'll
see is that if you if you feel that
nervousness and you attend to it a
little drama will run in your head in
images
you know and it'll be something like
well I'm going to go in here and no
one's going to talk to me and this will
happen in pictures like a little movie
no one's going to talk to me and I'm
going to end up in the corner and I'm
going to be bored and I'm going to be
sweaty and hot and it's going to be real
uncomfortable and it's just like this
other time when I went to this social
occasion and this terrible thing
happened and the whole drama will play
out in your head
and then you know you think oh that's
the problem and then well then maybe you
have someone to talk to
about that
fantasy
or maybe because now you have the
fantasy in front of you and you looked
at it you can think well wait a minute
as you said wait a minute wait a second
it isn't like that other situation my
friends are here I can go talk to John I
know him real well we'll just have a
conversation I can go sit at a table and
and with one of my friends and spend
most of the time there it can be with my
wife but
that what will happen is we get nervous
and that fantasy will make itself
manifest but you don't want to face it
and that's when you rush to a premature
solution you shut it off right yeah so
what what you're doing there is you're
failing to allow the anxiety ridden
fantasy to make itself manifest and you
you do that because you don't want to
know where You're vulnerable right and
no wonder like who the hell wants to
know where they're vulnerable but the
answer to that is well someone who wants
to fix it
because you cannot connect I do yeah I
do absolutely right now now I've come to
I love looking for those vulnerabilities
I love a good community and I love the
discourse I love my friends who will
Point them out
um and say hey here's a blind spot which
is why again circling back that's why we
have to have other people in our life
now if done with the in the right spirit
I love
um I love that's that's the whole
scientific process right rejecting the
note like I wasn't wrong right like the
whole idea is Let's Be a little bit less
wrong right so I think there's yeah
that's right that's the whole idea
that's humility man is to be a little
bit less wrong and Jesus that's what it
what a deal
but what a what a fun way to live it's
such an easier way to live than I have
to be right that's a that is an
exhausting grip on your life it's a
choking grip on your life instead of I
want to be a little bit less wrong and I
begin to seek out places where I might
be wrong that's just taking your blade
and trying to sharpen it as finely as
possible what a fun way to live well the
old the purpose of confession
classically was exactly that
so the idea was well I'm going to review
my week which doesn't seem like such a
bad idea why well I'm gonna think about
things that I did that didn't work out
so well and see if I can specify what
they were and see if I can figure out
how to replace them with something
better at least with the intent to do
better
and that confessional you know that
confessional in some sense which was
supposed to be Redemptive and that led
to forgiveness at least in principle was
very much the same thing as
discussing in genuine dialogue the
problems of your life it's like well
here I seem to have gone sideways here I
seem to have gone sideways here this
week how do I know that well my
conscience is calling me out on it and
there were some negative consequences
and I feel that this is the mistake I
made and I'd rather not make that
mistake and as you said if that's
handled
as if the goal is to stop making those
mistakes hopefully incrementally across
time then the evidence of the mistake
can be an invitation to positive
transformation and that would be the
encouraging element of humility right
it's like well why haven't we but you
have to do it in community I think I
think the like it went from this ancient
religious practice of confession which I
think you have to look back thousands of
years and say this practice this
practice continued to roll on
evolutionarily and culturally because it
had a deep value and then it was I don't
say co-opt it was absorbed by the Mental
Health Community to sit down in front
across from somebody and I I find great
great value in journaling writing things
down getting them out of my body and
onto paper but I think we've gotten very
isolated with our journaling and are
writing it down and we've become um I'm
having this confession with myself now
and there's value to that but I think
the truth value is having confession in
front of somebody else because then we
force ourselves to say do you see me and
do you still love me will you still be
here if you fully know me that it's the
most difficult part of yourself to
observe is the place where you're most
blind obviously and so you can journal
and you can concentrate on yourself but
that still might
produce a situation where your blindest
spots stay blind and also it limits your
ability to problem solve creatively
because you only draw on your own
resources one of the wonderful things
about a marriage that's functional is
that both of you have two brains to work
on
to work out whatever problem happens to
arise
and part of the reason that marriage is
difficult is because life is difficult
and you you have to jointly confront the
actual problems of life which is what
makes marriage different different than
dating
for example or different than an affair
which is a you know a wish a wish
fulfillment fantasy in some sense of all
the intimacy with none of the problems a
very terrible thing to do to your
partner who is then
Laden with only the problems but it's
very useful to have two brains because
each person is quite different and the
probability that the person you're
communicating with will have a different
take on both the problem and the
solution is extremely high
and so this is particularly true if
you're in a solipsistic uh crisis in
relationship to your mental health for
example if you're depressed it's very
hard to lift yourself out of that alone
because some of that dwelling on your
issues actually facilitates the
depression and the same thing happens
with anxiety
so now that we're here you're you're a
trained in practice clinical
psychologist I'm a trained I'm a lowly
trained counselor which for the
non-academics there's a there's a
definite hierarchy there
I have we over pathologized
culture our individuals are I feel like
we have become
um
a slavish adherence to Diagnostics into
labeling and when I look at when I look
at expectation theories that people live
into the labels that they're given or
the expectations that are put before
them
um I've got some high concern but I also
don't want to be dismissive right so
help me with that because I feel like
everybody man it's so easy to just go
get a diagnostic and go get a label and
that becomes you and then I end up
sitting with somebody and they say well
I can't take this job because I was
diagnosed with ADHD or I was diagnosed
with social anxiety disorder and my
impulse is hey that's a context not an
excuse it is a way a way that you see
and experience the world and people
experience you and you still got to get
up and go to work so how are we going to
manage that right but I I don't want to
be dismissive well look I think part of
the problem is is that it's a practical
problem in some sense because
the diagnostic
labeling process is necessary for such
things as insurance claims
right and so so the the the Lexicon is
that is that where we are man of course
it is and the Lexicon it's heartbreaking
man well and there's some utility in it
you know if if you're having panic
attacks and you're afraid to go out of
your house and I tell you you have
agrophobia and many other people have it
sometimes that's a real relief because
you're not the only crazy person of that
type in the world and there's some
Pathway to treatment but I was trained
fundamentally as a behaviorist and the
behaviorists aren't that
uh what would you call it impressed with
diagnostic labels and the reason for
that is that
they tend to break down problems into
actionable units
it's like well I'm depressed it's like
well okay fair enough but what's wrong
with your life and your mood in the
micro details and how could we address
that programmatically and I think the
problem with diagnosis is that it's
really easy to confuse diagnosis with
cause
right but I'm miserable why well because
I'm depressed now well maybe you have a
biochemical problem but absent that
depression isn't an a black box with
homogeneous contents there's specific
reasons that you're miserable and
unhappy and what we need to do is to
break down those reasons differentiate
them down to the level of detail where
you can start to experiment with
addressing them
and so if the diagnostic Enterprise
interferes with that
then it's counterproductive
and and that happens very frequently
yeah I remember the first time one of my
students was hospitalized for major
depression and
suicidal ideation
I was taken aback that the first couple
of days after you know they had gotten
sleep and were fed
the protocol was your job is to get up
and go take a shower and then you can go
back to bed we're going to take these
tiny steps towards right that's you know
my friend Dave Ramsey is okay we're
gonna get a thousand dollars sell
whatever you got sell your famous guitar
sell your gonna get a thousand dollars
in a savings account first and you're
gonna breathe for the first time and
then we're going to pay off your debt
and then we're good right it's these
tiny baby steps towards
um and again I think we've been sold a
bill of goods that mental health is I
just got to get all the thought right
thoughts in the right order and I
there's something I think we just swiped
off wholesale the behaviorist approach I
I just don't see that working out man I
think we have to often act our way into
a different way of thinking and
experiencing the world well the other
thing too that people should take heart
in consequence of is that as you pointed
out earlier when we were talking about
the cascading effects let's say of
sorting out how you have dinner with
your family there's multiplying effects
well it might be very disheartening to
see at what small scale you have to
begin improvements
right but the truth of the matter is is
that that tends to scale exponentially
is once you start making improvements
the improvements feed back upon
themselves and so even if you have to
start out small it doesn't take very
long before you're on the upward
trajectory and it's not linear you know
you can fail precipitously right but you
can also succeed precipitously once you
get the ball rolling
positive things tend to aggregate
together and you can make a lot of
progress even if you start from a pretty
damn dismal place
so how do we get that
that extraordinary insight into the
public lexicon how does that become a
way of operating because all of us are
staring we're running around staring at
our own belly buttons waiting to not
fall off that precipitous Decline and we
are missing the opportunity for this
accelerating
post-traumatic growth right we've been
through hard things okay what come
that's the whole book man well that what
about that now what do we what do we do
next that's the answer to your question
well how do we bring that into the
public domain well you wrote a book
having this conversation and so yeah and
and that is how you do it and and you
try to communicate
the utility of what would you call it
humble courageous incremental movement
forward and honest communication social
Community all the things that we
discussed today and I should also point
out that we are out of time for the
YouTube all right interview is there
anything else that you want to bring to
the attention of the people who are
watching and listening before we before
we close
no I just want to say I'm I'm grateful
for your hospitality it's been you've
been a gift I appreciate you well thank
you and thank you for your book and I
would say to people who are watching and
listening
um Dr delony's book
is a very straightforward take on
practical solutions that you can
Implement to start incrementally
improving your life and that is the
right way to
to progress one brick at a time you
build a solid wall one brick at a time
and it can happen a lot faster than you
think and so I think the book
fills a necessary Niche and I like the
winner in which you interwove your
description of story and identity and
the broader social community and the
issue of incremental Improvement and so
I'd encourage people thank you for
watching and listening to take a look
yeah yeah and it was real good talking
to you for those of you who are watching
and listening I'm going to talk to Dr
deloney for another half an hour on the
daily wire plus platform and the daily
wire plus makes these professionally
produced YouTube
conversations possible and so thank you
to them for that and if you're
interested in hearing a little bit more
about Dr delony's biography and about
what's made him successful in his career
and his marriage then head on over to
the Daily wire plus platform and and
tune in and otherwise hopefully we'll
see all of you again on my YouTube
channel and thank you very much for your
time and attention
hello everyone I would encourage you to
continue listening to my conversation
with my guest on dailywireplus.com